'Meme' is a word whose meaning has changed pretty dramatically since its relatively recent inception. For most people, it now conjures up images of image macros, jokes, or strange internet references. However, the origional meaning was much more academic -- a meme was a unit of information. Like a gene, memes proliferate through a population and mutate over time, creating new or more easily spreadable versions of the meme.

However, that description doesn't really sound much like a common description of a gene. Instead, it seems to map much cleaner to the definition of a virus. Like viruses or other diseases, memes spread through a population (over the internet or in person) through interactions. Over time, they mutate; the versions which are more virulent spread faster, and thus a form of selection occurs to breed the most understandable or enraging ideas, any idea which will drive its host to expose others to it through conversations or emails or blog posts.

Using data from a 2008 study, We sought to track the spread of memes through a population and compare it to predictions from the SIR model discussed in class. In our case, the data was quotes and other text fragments scraped from a huge volume of blog posts and other websites, as well as the pages associated hyperlinks.

Since 2008 was an election year, we tried to use phrases which would be likely to be very successful memes. "Change we can believe in" was Obama's 2008 slogan, and it performed its role brilliantly. We performed a number of tasks to analyze the data, including finding all the unique top level domains and their incidence rate, and for each TLD which expressed the meme, finding its time of infection and time of recovery. Our infection time was the time at which the site first expressed the meme, and the time of recovery was the last time at which another site which was also infected linked back to the first.

Our findings was that memes do indeed follow the viral model that the SIR model does such a good job of describing. The rate of infection and recovery of the sample population forms the nice, familiar curve of that the SIR model predicts. Some aspects of our analysis proved challenging, however. For example, websites were not very good about linking back to the place they heard the idea from -- thus the 'time of recovery' was often an unreliable metric. Additionally, there are plenty of ways to become infected by a meme (especially such a well-know, political one) which you cannot link to like on TV or at a real-life rally.

While some of our metrics aren't as straight-forward as we initially belived, the results obtained show clearly that the spread of a meme through an online population could be modelled by a modified SIR prediction, in which the inherent difference between human populations in the real world and online can be taken into account. In the end, one of the most interesting parts of this project was finding the right meme to work with -- there was plenty of nostalgia to be had remembering old jokes and macros from 6 years ago, which have since completely run their course. If only the WHO could replicate the rate at which memes go extinct on the internet with diseases in the real world!